JUDY WOODRUFF: Last year, former
President Obama and China's
President Xi Jinping announced
on the same day that the U.S.
and China would join the Paris
climate agreement, in an effort
to forestall climate
change through capping
and reducing emissions.
China's participation
was seen as key.
It is the world's
largest emitter of carbon
dioxide, with the United
States running second.
But on June 1, this month,
President Trump announced his
intention to withdraw from the
agreement, citing possible
economic harm to the U.S. Four
days later, the top American
official in China, the charge
d'affaires in Beijing, tendered
his resignation, citing
the president's withdrawal.
His name is David Rank.
He served 27 years in
the Foreign Service.
And he joins me now
for his first interview
since leaving government.
David Rank, welcome.
You knew, when Donald Trump
was running for president,
that he had said that the U.S.
shouldn't be in
this climate accord.
What was your thinking then?
DAVID RANK, Former U.S.
Diplomat: Boy, I have served
five presidents over 27 years.
I have been through a lot
of presidential campaigns.
I have heard a lot of
things both about the
U.S.-China relationship
and about other issues.
I suppose I thought, boy,
that's bad idea but there are
a lot of bad ideas talked about
in presidential campaigns,
and we will see what happens
when he becomes president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, when
he made that announcement,
what was your reaction?
DAVID RANK: You know, Judy, up
until the day he -- in fact,
I would say the day before,
I -- it kind of
caught me off-guard.
It seemed so improbable that
the U.S. would pull out, because
Paris is a symbol of U.S.
leadership in the
region, in the world.
I mean, the benefits that
accrue from being a leader and
being in Paris just seemed to
be so obvious that it sort
of caught me off-guard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were
the benefits, in your mind?
DAVID RANK: Look, the -- how
many agreements are there in
the world where two countries,
now all but three countries
in the world, are members,
countries that are sort of the
closest partners we
have had for 70 years?
It's one of the most important
issues to those countries.
And so the benefits of being
the leader in that, of, as you
said, working together with
China to bring about, to
make the Paris agreement
possible, and being the
true leader on climate
issues, really is a
remarkable benefit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why does
climate matter to you?
DAVID RANK: Well, as I explained
to my staff when I went, not
only did it bother me from
the perspective of bad policy,
but also the obligation we
have to our kids and, frankly,
the moral obligation I feel
to take care of the planet we
have been given and the planet
we leave our children and
their children, and, you know,
realizing that if we -- from
all of those perspectives, ask
even to take very small steps,
I realized that I couldn't
do it.
I couldn't in good conscience
be party to the U.S. withdrawal.
And so we have a
disciplined service.
You either agree to
implement the president's
policy or you step aside.
And so that was the
solution I put forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, his argument
that this was doing economic
harm to the U.S., he talked
about draconian repercussions
for the U.S. thanks to the
accord, and he said he wanted
to negotiate a new
deal on climate?
DAVID RANK: I'm quick to admit
I'm not an expert on climate.
And had there been a serious
proposal, had we said, look,
Paris is -- instead of Paris,
we want to do X, Y or Z, you
probably would have changed
the way I looked at it.
There hasn't been any
real indication of that.
And I suspect -- well, I will
wait and see from the outside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How difficult
a decision is this for you?
You have been in the Foreign
Service for 27 years.
DAVID RANK: Yes, I love my job.
I love the people I work with.
I think -- I would like to
think I got up every morning,
and with a feeling of gratitude
for the ability to do what
I was doing, to serve the
American people, to work with a
group of colleagues who
were committed to the
same sorts of goals I am.
And it was tough.
It was very difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
you could have stayed.
And I guess did anybody make
the argument you could stay
and fight and stand up for
what you believe in?
DAVID RANK: Absolutely.
And I think there's
honor in that.
And I made the case to the
folks, because there are a
lot of people who I think, not
just in the embassy in Beijing,
but across the State Department
and across the government,
who are asking themselves,
if I fundamentally
disagree, what do I do?
And my answer to that
is, look, I have my own
particular personal situation.
I'm relatively close to the
end of my career, or I was.
I had been in for
almost 30 years.
But if you have got 20 years
ahead of you, then there's
real honor, honor to doing the
sort of tough work, the slow and
steady work that we as diplomats
and really people throughout
the U.S. government -- I
mean, that's the role of the
civil servant, the role of the
public servant.
And I think it is and
will continue to be
an honorable role.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing, and
separate from this decision,
how do you see the state of
relations right now between the
United States and China, with
President Trump pressing the
Chinese in particular to lean
on the North Koreans to pull
back their nuclear program?
DAVID RANK: I think we're early
in the Trump administration.
I think it's a positive
thing that the president
and his senior advisers
have made it clear
that it's an important
issue, that we have to
grapple with North Korea.
You know, it's not the only
issue between the United
States and China, but certainly
it is the one that is
on the front burner.
But I think it will
be a challenge.
It will take hard work every
day, not just by the president,
not just by the secretary
of state, but by the colleagues
of mine who are still in
Beijing and colleagues in the
State Department and
the Department of
Defense and elsewhere
in the U.S. government.
It's a real challenge
to the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Rank, the
former charge d'affaires at
the U.S. Embassy in Beijing,
China, up until, what,
about eight or 10 days ago.
DAVID RANK: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you very
much for talking with us.
DAVID RANK: Judy,
thank you very much.